I prey thee, good Mercutio,let's retire:
The day is hot, theCapulets abroad,
And, if we meet, we shallnot 'scape a brawl;
For now, these hot days,is the mad blood stirring.
Thou art like one of thesefellows
that when he enters theconfines of a tavern
claps me his sword on thetable
and says 'God send me noneed of thee!'
and by the operation ofthe second cup
draws it on the drawer,when indeed there is noneed.
Am I like such a fellow?
Come, come,
thou art as hot a Jack inthy mood as any in Italy,
and as soon moved to bemoody,
and as soon moody to bemoved.
And what to?
Nay, an there were twosuch, we should have noneshortly,
for one would kill theother.
Thou! why, thou wouldstquarrel
with a man that hath ahair more, or a hair less,
in his beard, than thouhast:
thou would quarrel with aman for cracking nuts,
having no other reason butbecause thou hast hazeleyes:
what eye but such an eyewould spy out such aquarrel?
Thy head is as fun ofquarrels as an egg is fullof meat,
and yet thy head has beenbeaten
as addle as an egg forquarrelling:
thou hast quarrelled witha man for coughing in thestreet,
because he hath wakenedyou dog
that hath lain asleep inthe sun:
didst thou not fall outwith a tailor
for wearing his newdoublet before Easter?
with another, for tyinghis new shoe with oldriband?
Ah, ah, yet thou wilttutor me from quarrelling!
By my head, here comes theCapulet.
By my heel, I care not.
Follow close, for I willspeak to them.
Gentlemen, good den: aword with one of you.
And but one word with oneof us?
couple it with something;make it a word and a blow.
You shall find me aptenough to that, sir,
an you will give meoccasion.
Could you not take someoccasion without thegiving?
Mercutio, thou consort'stwith Romeo,--
Consort!
God, dost thou make usminstrels?
An thou make minstrels ofus,
look to hear nothing butdiscords:
here's my fiddlestick;
here's that shall make youdance.
'Zounds, consort!
We talk here in the publichaunt of men:
Either withdraw unto someprivate place,
And reason coldly of yourgrievances,
Or else depart; here alleyes gaze on us.
Men's eyes were made tolook, and let them gaze;
I will not budge for noman's pleasure, I.
Well, peace be with you,sir: here comes my man.
But I'll be hanged, sir,if he wear your livery:
Marry, go before to field,he'll be your follower;
Your worship in that sensemay call him 'man.'
Romeo, the love I bearthee can afford
No better term thanthis,-- thou art avillain.
Tybalt, the reason that Ihave to love thee
Doth much excuse theappertaining rage
To such a greeting:villain am I none;
Therefore farewell; I seethou know'st me not.
Boy, this shall not excusethe injuries
That thou hast done me;therefore turn and draw.
I do protest, I neverinjured thee,
But love thee better thanthou canst devise,
Till thou shalt know thereason of my love:
And so, good Capulet,--which name I tender
As dearly as mine own,--be satisfied.
O calm, dishonourable,vile submission!
Alla stoccata carries itaway.
Tybalt, you rat-catcher,will you walk?
What wouldst thou havewith me?
Good king of cats, nothingbut one of your ninelives;
which I mean to make boldwithal,
and as you shall use mehereafter,
drybeat the rest of theeight.
Will you pluck your swordout of his pitcher by theears?
Make haste, lest mine beabout your ears ere it beout.
Gentle Mercutio, put thyrapier up!
Come, sir, your passado.
Draw, Benvolio; beat downtheir weapons!
Tybalt, Mercutio, theprince expressly hath
Forbidden bandying inVerona streets.
Hold, Tybalt! goodMercutio!
I am hurt.
A plague o' both yourhouses!
I'm sped.
What, is he gone, and hathnothing?
What, art thou hurt?
Ay, ay, a scratch, ascratch; marry, 'tisenough.
Where is my page?
Go, villain, fetch asurgeon.
Courage, man; the hurtcannot be much.
No, 'tis not so deep as awell,
nor so wide as achurch-door; but 'tisenough,'twill serve:
ask for me to-morrow,
and you shall find me agrave man.
I am peppered, I warrant,for this world.
A plague o' both yourhouses!
'Zounds, a dog, a rat, amouse, a cat,
to scratch a man to death!
a braggart, a rogue, avillain,
that fights by the book ofarithmetic!
Why the devil came youbetween us?
I was hurt under your arm.
I thought all for thebest.
Help me into some house,Benvolio,
Or I shall faint.
A plague o' both yourhouses!
They have made worms' meatof me:
I have it, And soundlytoo:
your houses!
O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made meeffeminate
And in my temper soften'dvalour's steel!
O Romeo, Romeo, braveMercutio is dead.
That gallant spirit hathaspired the clouds,
Which too untimely heredid scorn the earth.
This day's black fate onmore days doth depend;
This but begins the woethat others must end.
Here comes the furiousTybalt back again.
Alive, in triumph! andMercutio slain!
Away to heaven, respectivelenity,
And fire-eyed fury be myconduct now!
Tybalt, take the villainback again,
That late thou gavest me;for Mercutio's soul
Is but a little way aboveour heads,
Staying for thine to keephim company:
Either thou, or I, orboth, must go with him.
Thou, wretched boy, thatdidst consort him here,
Shalt with him hence.
This shall determine that.
Romeo, away, be gone!
The citizens are up, andTybalt slain.
Stand not amazed: theprince will doom theedeath,
If thou art taken: hence,be gone, away!
O, I am fortune's fool!
Why dost thou stay?
Which way ran he thatkill'd Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer,which way ran he?
There lies that Tybalt.
Up, sir, go with me;
I charge thee in theprince's name, obey.
Where are the vilebeginners of this fray?
O noble prince, I candiscover all
The unlucky manage of thisfatal brawl:
There lies the man, slainby young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman,brave Mercutio.
Tybalt, my cousin!
O, the blood is spilt o'my dear kinsman!
Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours, shedblood of Montague.
Benvolio, who began thisbloody fray?
Tybalt, now slain, whomRomeo's hand did slay.
He is a kinsman to theMontague;
Affection makes him false;he speaks not true:
Some twenty of them foughtin this black strife,
And all those twenty couldbut kill one life.
I beg for justice, whichthou, prince, must give;
Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeomust not live.
Romeo slew him, he slewMercutio;
Who now the price of hisdear blood doth owe?
Not Romeo, prince, he wasMercutio's friend;
His fault concludes butwhat the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.
And for that offence
Immediately we do exilehim hence.
I have an interest in yourhate's proceeding,
My blood for your rudebrawls doth lie a-bleeding;
But I'll amerce you withso strong a fine
That you shall all repentthe loss of mine:
I will be deaf to pleadingand excuses;
Nor tears nor prayersshall purchase out abuses:
Therefore use none: letRomeo hence in haste,
Else, when he's found,that hour is his last.
Attend our will:
Mercy but murders,pardoning those that kill.
Gallop apace, youfiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging:such a wagoner
As Phaethon would whip youto the west,
And bring in cloudy nightimmediately.
Spread thy close curtain,love-performing night,
That runaway's eyes maywink and Romeo
Leap to these arms,untalk'd of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do theiramorous rites
By their own beauties; or,if love be blind,
It best agrees with night.
Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron,all in black,
And learn me how to lose awinning match,
Play'd for a pair ofstainless maidenhoods:
Hood my unmann'd blood,bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle; tillstrange love, grown bold,
Think true love actedsimple modesty.
Come, night; come, Romeo;come, thou day in night;
For thou wilt lie upon thewings of night
Whiter than new snow on araven's back.
Come, gentle night, come,loving, black-brow'd night,
Give me my Romeo; and,when he shall die,
Take him and cut him outin little stars,
And he shall make the faceof heaven so fine
That all the world will bein love with night
And pay no worship to thegarish sun.
O, I have bought themansion of a love,
But not possess'd it, and,though I am sold,
Not yet enjoy'd: sotedious is this day
As is the night beforesome festival
To an impatient child whohath new robes
And may not wear them.
Now, nurse, what news?
What hast thou there? thecords
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Ay, ay, the cords.
Ay me! What news? why dostthou wring thy hands?
We are undone, lady, weare undone!
Alack the day!
He's gone, he's kill'd,he's dead!
Can heaven be so envious?
Romeo can, Though heavencannot:
O Romeo, Romeo!
Who ever would havethought it?
Romeo!
What devil art thou, thatdost torment me thus?
This torture should beroar'd in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself?say thou but "I,"
And that bare vowel "I"shall poison more
Than the death-darting eyeof cockatrice.
If he be slain, say "I";or if not, no:
Brief sounds determine ofmy weal or woe.
I saw the wound, I saw itwith mine eyes--
God save the mark!-- hereon his manly breast:
A piteous corse, a bloodypiteous corse;
Pale, pale as ashes, allbedaub'd in blood,
All in gore-blood; Iswounded at the sight.
O, break, my heart! poorbankrupt, break at once!
To prison, eyes, ne'erlook on liberty!
Vile earth, to earthresign; end motion here;
And thou and Romeo pressone heavy bier!
Tybalt, Tybalt, the bestfriend I had!
O courteous Tybalt! honestgentleman!
That ever I should live tosee thee dead!
What storm is this thatblows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughter'd, andis Tybalt dead?
My dearest cousin, and mydearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet,sound the general doom!
For who is living, ifthose two are gone?
Tybalt is gone, and Romeobanished;
Romeo that slew him, he isbanished.
O God! did Romeo's handshed Tybalt's blood?
It did, it did; alas theday, it did!
O serpent heart, hid witha flowering face!
Did ever dragon keep sofair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant! fiendangelical!
Dove-feather'd raven!wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despised substance ofdivinest show!
Just opposite to what thoujustly seem'st,
A damned saint, anhonourable villain!
O nature, what hadst thouto do in hell,
When thou didst bower thespirit of a fiend
In moral paradise of suchsweet flesh?
Was ever book containingsuch vile matter
So fairly bound?
O that deceit should dwellIn such a gorgeous palace!
There's no trust,
No faith, no honesty inmen; all perjured,
All forsworn, all naught,all dissemblers.
Ah, where's my man? giveme some aqua vitae:
These woes, these griefs,these sorrows make me old.
Shame come to Romeo!
Blister'd be thy tongueFor such a wish!
He was not born to shame:
Upon his brow shame isashamed to sit;
For 'tis a throne wherehonour may be crown'd
Sole monarch of theuniversal earth.
O, what a beast was I tochide at him!
Will you speak well of himthat kill'd your cousin?
Shall I speak ill of himthat is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongueshall smooth thy name,
When I, thy three-hourswife, have mangled it?
But, wherefore, villain,didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin wouldhave kill'd my husband:
Back, foolish tears, backto your native spring;
Your tributary dropsbelong to woe,
Which you, mistaking,offer up to joy.
My husband lives, thatTybalt would have slain;
And Tybalt's dead, thatwould have slain my husband:
All this is comfort;wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worserthan Tybalt's death,
That murder'd me: I wouldforget it fain;
But, O, it presses to mymemory,
Like damned guilty deedsto sinners' minds:
"Tybalt is dead, andRomeo...banished;"
That "banished," that oneword "banished,"
Hath slain ten thousandTybalts.
Tybalt's death
Was woe enough, if it hadended there.
Why follow'd not, when shesaid "Tybalt's dead,"
Thy father, or thy mother,nay, or both?
"Romeo is banished," tospeak that word,
Is father, mother, Tybalt,Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead.
"Romeo is banished!"
There is no end, no limit,measure, bound,
In that word's death; nowords can that woe sound.
Where is my father, and mymother, nurse?
Weeping and wailing overTybalt's corse:
Will you go to them?
I will bring you thither.
Wash they his wounds withtears: mine shall be spent,
When theirs are dry, forRomeo's banishment.
Take up those cords: poorropes, you are beguiled,
Both you and I; for Romeois exiled:
He made you for a highwayto my bed;
But I, a maid, diemaiden-widowed.
Come, cords, come, nurse;I'll to my wedding-bed;
And death, not Romeo, takemy maidenhead!
Romeo.
Romeo, come forth; comeforth, thou fearful man:
Affliction is enamour'd ofthy parts,
And thou art wedded tocalamity.
Father, what news?
what is the prince's doom?
What sorrow cravesacquaintance at my hand,
That I yet know not?
Too familiar
Is my dear son with suchsour company:
I bring thee tidings ofthe prince's doom.
What less than dooms-dayis the prince's doom?
A gentler judgmentvanish'd from his lips,
Not body's death, butbody's banishment.
Banishment?
be merciful, say "death."
Here from Verona art thoubanished:
Be patient, for the worldis broad and wide.
There is no world withoutVerona walls,
But purgatory, torture,hell itself.
Hence-banished is banish'dfrom the world,
And world's exile isdeath: then banished,
Is death mis-term'd:calling death banishment,
Thou cutt'st my head offwith a golden axe,
And smilest upon thestroke that murders me.
O deadly sin! O rudeunthankfulness!
Thy fault our law callsdeath; but the kind prince,
Taking thy part, hathrush'd aside the law,
And turn'd that black worddeath to banishment:
This is dear mercy, andthou seest it not.
'Tis torture, and notmercy: heaven is here,
Where Juliet lives; andevery cat and dog
And little mouse, everyunworthy thing,
Live here in heaven andmay look on her;
But Romeo may not: morevalidity,
More honourable state,more courtship lives
In carrion-flies thanRomeo: they may seize
On the white wonder ofdear Juliet's flesh
And steal immortalblessing from her lips,
But Romeo may not; he isbanished:
This may flies do, when Ifrom this must fly:
They are free men, but Iam banished.
And say'st thou yet thatexile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mix'd,no sharp-ground knife,
No sudden mean of death,though ne'er so mean,
But "banished" to killme?-- "banished"?
O friar, the damned usethat word in hell;
Howling attends it: howhast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostlyconfessor,
A sin-absolver, and myfriend profess'd,
To mangle me with thatword "banished"?
Thou fond mad man, hear mea little speak.
O, thou wilt speak againof banishment.
I'll give thee armour tokeep off that word:
Adversity's sweet milk,philosophy,
To comfort thee, thoughthou art banished.
Yet "banished"? Hang upphilosophy!
Unless philosophy can makea Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse aprince's doom,
It helps not, it prevailsnot: talk no more.
O, then I see that madmenhave no ears.
How can they, when thatwise men have no eyes?
Let me dispute with theeof thine estate.
Thou canst not speak ofthat thou dost not feel:
Wert thou as young as I,Juliet thy love,
An hour but married,Tybalt murdered,
Doting like me and like mebanished,
Then mightst thou speak, thenmightst thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground,as I do now,
Taking the measure of anunmade grave!
Romeo, hide thyself.
Not I; unless the breathof heartsick groans,
Mist-like, infold me fromthe search of eyes.
Hark, how they knock!
Romeo, arise; Thou wilt betaken.
Stay awhile!
Stand up; Run to my study.
By and by!
God's will, Whatsimpleness is this!
I come, I come!
Who knocks so hard? whencecome you?
what's your will?
Let me come in, and youshall know my errand;
I come from Lady Juliet.
Welcome, then.
O holy friar, O, tell me,holy friar,
Where is my lady's lord,where's Romeo?
There on the ground, withhis own tears made drunk.
O, he is even in mymistress' case,
Just in her case!
O woeful sympathy!
Piteous predicament!
Even so lies she,
Blubbering and weeping,weeping and blubbering.
Stand up, stand up; stand,and you be a man:
For Juliet's sake, for hersake, rise and stand;
Why should you fall intoso deep an O?
Nurse!
O sir! o sir!
Well, death's the end ofall.
Spakest thou of Juliet?how is it with her?
Doth she not think me anold murderer,
Now that I have stain'dthe childhood of our joy
With blood removed butlittle from her own?
Where is she? and how dothshe? and what says
My conceal'd lady to ourcancell'd love?
O, she says nothing, sir,but weeps and weeps;
And now falls on her bed;and then starts up,
And Tybalt calls; and thenon Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.
As if that name, murder her;as that name's cursed hand
Murder'd her kinsman.
O, tell me, friar, tellme,
In what vile part of thisanatomy
Doth my name lodge? tellme, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.
Hold thy desperate hand:
Art thou a man? thy formcries out thou art:
Thy tears are womanish;thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of abeast.
Thou hast amazed me: by myholy order,
I thought thy dispositionbetter temper'd.
Hast thou slain Tybalt?wilt thou slay thyself?
And slay thy lady that inthy life lives,
By doing damned hate uponthyself?
What, rouse thee. thyJuliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thouwast but lately dead;
There art thou happy:Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slew'st Tybalt;there are thou happy too:
The law that threaten'ddeath becomes thy friend
And turns it to exile;there art thou happy:
A pack of blessings lightsup on thy back;
Happiness courts thee inher best array;
But, like a misbehaved andsullen wench,
Thou pout'st upon thyfortune and thy love:
Take heed, take heed, forsuch die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love,as was decreed,
Ascend her chamber, henceand comfort her:
But look thou stay nottill the watch be set,
For then thou canst notpass to Mantua;
Where thou shalt live,till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage,reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the prince,and call thee back
With twenty hundredthousand times more joy
Than thou went'st forth inlamentation.
Go before, nurse: commendme to thy lady;
bid her hasten all thehouse to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makesthem apt unto:
Romeo is coming.
O Lord, I could havestay'd here all the night
To hear good counsel: O,what learning is!
My lord, I'll tell my ladyyou will come.
Do so, and bid my sweetprepare to chide.
Here, here, sir, a ringshe bid me give you, sir:
Hie you, make haste, forit grows very late.
How well my comfort isrevived by this!
Go hence; good night; andhere stands all your state:
Either be gone before thewatch be set,
Or by the break of daydisguised from hence:
Sojourn in Mantua; I'llfind out your man,
And he shall signify fromtime to time
Every good hap to you thatchances here:
Give me thy hand; 'tislate: farewell; good night.
But that a joy past joycalls out on me,
It were a grief, so briefto part with thee:
Farewell.
Things have fall'n out,sir, so unluckily,
That we have had no timeto move our daughter:
Look you, she loved herkinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I-- Well, weare born to die.
'Tis very late, she'll notcome down to-night:
I promise you, but foryour company,
I would have been a-bed anhour ago.
These times of woe affordno time to woo.
Madam, good night: commendme to your daughter.
I will, and know her mindearly to-morrow;
To-night she is mew'd upto her heaviness.
Sir Paris, I will make adesperate tender
Of my child's love: Ithink she will be ruled
In all respects by me;nay, more, I doubt it not.
Wife, go you to her ereyou go to bed;
Acquaint her here of myson Paris' love;
And bid her, mark you me,on Wednesday next--
But, soft! what day isthis?
Monday, my lord.
Monday! Well, Wednesday istoo soon,
O' Thursday be it then: o'Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married tothis noble earl.
Will you be ready? do youlike this haste?
We'll keep no great ado--a friend or two;
For, hark you, Tybaltbeing slain so late,
It may be thought we heldhim carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if werevel much:
Therefore we'll have somehalf a dozen friends,
And there an end.
But what say you toThursday?
My lord, I would thatThursday were to-morrow.
Well, get you gone: o'Thursday be it, then.
Wife, go you to Juliet ereyou go to bed,
Prepare her, wife, againstthis wedding-day.
Farewell, my lord.
Light to my chamber, ho!
Afore me!
It is so very very late,
That we may call it earlyby and by.
Good night.
Wilt thou be gone?
it is not yet near day:
It was the nightingale,and not the lark,
That pierced the fearfulhollow of thine ear;
Nightly she sings on yonpomegranate-tree:
Believe me, love, it wasthe nightingale.
It was the lark, theherald of the morn,
No nightingale: look,love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severingclouds in yonder east:
Night's candles are burntout, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the mistymountain tops.
I must be gone and live,or stay and die.
Yon light is notday-light, I know it, I:
It is some meteor that thesun exhales,
To be to thee this night atorch-bearer,
And to light thee on thyway to Mantua:
Therefore stay yet; thouneed'st not to be gone.
Let me be ta'en, let me beput to death;
I am content, so thou wilthave it so.
I'll say yon grey is notthe morning's eye,
'Tis but the pale reflexof Cynthia's brow;
Nor that is not the lark,whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so highabove our heads:
I have more care to staythan will to go:
Come, death, and welcome!Juliet wills it so.
How is't, my soul? let'stalk; it is not day.
It is, it is: hie hence,be gone, away!
It is the lark that singsso out of tune,
Straining harsh discordsand unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makessweet division;
This doth not so, for shedivideth us:
Some say the lark andloathed toad change eyes,
O, now I would they hadchanged voices too!
Since arm from arm thatvoice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence withhunt's-up to the day,
O, now be gone; more lightand light it grows.
More light and light; moredark and dark our woes!
Nurse?
Madam, your lady mother iscoming to your chamber:
The day is broke; be wary,look about.
Then, window, let day in,and let life out.
Farewell! one kiss, andI'll descend.
Art thou gone so? love,lord, ay, husband, friend!
I must hear from theeevery day in the hour,
For in a minute there aremany days:
O, by this count I shallbe much in years
Ere I again behold myRomeo!
Farewell!
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey mygreetings, love, to thee.
O think'st thou we shallever meet again?
I doubt it not; and allthese woes shall serve
As sweet discourses in ourtime to come.
O God, I have anill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, nowthou art below,
As one dead in the bottomof a tomb:
Either my eyesight fails,or thou look'st pale.
And trust me, love, in myeye so do you:
Dry sorrow drinks ourblood.
Adieu!
adieu!
O fortune, fortune! allmen call thee fickle:
If thou art fickle, whatdost thou with him
That is renown'd forfaith?
Be fickle, fortune;
For then, I hope, thouwilt not keep him long,
But send him back.
Ho, daughter! are you up?
Why, how now, Juliet!
Madam, I am not well.
Evermore weeping for yourcousin's death?
What, wilt you wash himfrom his grave with tears?
An if thou couldst, thoucouldst not make him live;
Therefore, have done: somegrief shows much of love;
But much of grief showsstill some want of wit.
Yet let me weep for such afeeling loss.
So shall you feel theloss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.
Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but everweep the friend.
Well, girl, thou weep'stnot so much for his death,
As that the villain liveswhich slaughter'd him.
What villain, madam?
That same villain, Romeo.
Villain and he be manymiles asunder.
God Pardon him!
I do, with all my heart;
And yet no man like hedoth grieve my heart.
That is, because thetraitor murderer lives.
Ay, madam, from the reachof these my hands:
Would none but I mightvenge my cousin's death!
We will have vengeance forit, fear thou not:
weep no more.
I'll send to one inMantua,
Where that same banish'drunagate doth live,
Shall give him such anunaccustom'd dram,
That he shall soon keepTybalt company:
And then, I hope, thouwilt be satisfied.
Indeed, I never shall besatisfied
With Romeo, till I beholdhim--dead.
Madam, if you could findout but a man
To bear a poison, I wouldtemper it;
That Romeo should, uponreceipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet.
O, how my heart abhors
To hear him named, andcannot come to him.
Find thou the means, andI'll find such a man.
But now I'll tell theejoyful tidings, girl.
And joy comes well in sucha needy time:
What are they, I beseechyour ladyship?
Well, well, thou hast acareful father, child;
One who, to put thee fromthy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a suddenday of joy,
That thou expect'st notnor I look'd not for.
Madam, in happy time, whatday is that?
Marry, my child, earlynext Thursday morn,
The gallant, young, andnoble gentleman,
The County Paris, at SaintPeter's Church,
Shall happily make theethere a joyful bride.
Now, by Saint Peter'sChurch and Peter too,
He shall not make me therea joyful bride.
I wonder at this haste;that I must wed
Ere he, that should behusband, comes to woo.
I pray you, tell my lordand father, madam,
I will not marry yet; and,when I do, I swear,
It shall be Romeo, whomyou know I hate,
Rather than Paris.
These are news indeed!
Here comes your father;tell him so yourself,
And see how he will takeit at your hands.
When the sun sets, the airdoth drizzle dew;
But for the sunset of mybrother's son
It rains downright.
How now! a conduit, girl?what, still in tears?
Evermore showering?
In one little body
Thou counterfeit'st abark, a sea, a wind;
For still thy eyes, whichI may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears;the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood;the winds, thy sighs;
Who, raging with thytears, and they with them,
Without a sudden calm,will overset
Thy tempest-tossed body.
How now, wife!
Have you deliver'd to herour decree?
Ay, sir; but she will none,she gives you thanks.
I would the fool weremarried to her grave!
Soft! take me with you,take me with you, wife.
How! will she none? dothshe not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? doth shenot count her blest,
Unworthy as she is, thatwe have wrought
So worthy a gentleman tobe her bridegroom?
Not proud, you have; butthankful, that you have:
Proud can I never be ofwhat I hate;
But thankful even forhate, that is meant love.
How now, how now,chop-logic!
What is this?
"Proud," and "I thank you,"and "I thank you not;"
And yet "not proud,"mistress minion, you,
Thank me no thankings, andproud me no prouds,
But fettle your finejoints 'gainst Thursdaynext,
To go with Paris to SaintPeter's Church,
Or I will drag thee on ahurdle thither.
Out, you green-sicknesscarrion! out, you baggage!
You tallow-face!
Fie, fie! what, are youmad?
Good father, I beseech youon my knees,
Hear me with patience butto speak a word.
Hang thee, young baggage!disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what: get theeto church o' Thursday,
Or never after look me inthe face:
Speak not, reply not, donot answer me;
My fingers itch.
Wife, we scarce thought usblest
That God had lent us butthis only child;
But now I see this one isone too much,
And that we have a cursein having her:
Out on her, hilding!
God in heaven bless her!
You are to blame, my lord,to rate her so.
Hold your tongue,
Good prudence; smatterwith your gossips, go.
I speak no treason.
O, God ye god-den.
May not one speak?
Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity over agossip's bowl;
For here we need it not.
You are too hot.
God's bread! it makes memad:
Day, night, hour, tide,time, work, play,
Alone, in company, stillmy care hath been
To have her match'd: andhaving now provided
A gentleman of nobleparentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful,and nobly train'd,
Stuff'd, as they say, withhonourable parts,
Proportion'd as one'sthought would wish a man;
And then to have awretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in herfortune's tender,
To answer "I'll not wed; Icannot love,
I am too young; I prayyou, pardon me."
But, an you will not wed,I'll pardon you:
Graze where you will youshall not house with me:
Look to't, think on't, Ido not use to jest.
Thursday is near; lay handon heart, advise:
An you be mine, I'll giveyou to my friend;
And you be not, hang, beg,starve, die in the streets,
For, by my soul, I'llne'er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shallnever do thee good:
Trust to't, bethink you;I'll not be forsworn.
Is there no pity sittingin the clouds,
That sees into the bottomof my grief?
O, sweet my mother, castme not away!
Delay this marriage for amonth, a week;
Or, if thou do not, makethe bridal bed
In that dim monument whereTybalt lies.
Talk not to me, for I'llnot speak a word:
Do as thou wilt, I've donewith thee.
O God!--O nurse, how shallthis be prevented?
My husband is on earth, myfaith in heaven;
How can that faith returnagain to earth,
Unless that husband sendit me from heaven
By leaving earth? comfortme, counsel me.
Alack, alack, that heavenshould practise stratagems
Upon so soft a subject asmyself!
What say'st thou? hastthou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, nurse.
Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banish'd; and allthe world to nothing,
That he dares ne'er comeback to challenge thee;
Or, if he do, it needsmust be by stealth.
Then, since the case sostands as now it doth,
I think it best youmarried with the county.
O, he's a lovelygentleman!
Romeo's a dishclout tohim: an eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, soquick, so fair an eye asParis hath.
Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy inthis second match,
For it excels your first:or if it did not,
Your first is dead; or'twere as good he were,
As living here and you nouse of him.
Speakest thou from thyheart?
Ay, and from my soul too;Or else beshrew them both.
Amen!
What?
Well, thou hast comfortedme marvellous much.
Go in: and tell my lady Iam gone,
Having displeased myfather, to Laurence' cell,
To make confession and tobe absolved.
Marry, I will; and this iswisely done.
Ancient damnation!
O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish methus forsworn,
Or to dispraise my lordwith that same tongue
Which she hath praised himwith above compare
So many thousand times?
Go, counsellor;
Thou and my bosomhenceforth shall be twain.
I'll to the friar, to knowhis remedy:
If all else fail, myselfhave power to die.